Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Of all the themes handled by science fiction
authors, that of alien contact has been one of the most consistently popular and
fascinating. For a good reason, too. Aliens, whether they be the hostile bug
-eyed monsters of the old pulp magazines or the friendly creatures of close
encounters of the third kind, have always been one of the biggest attractions of
science fiction. In the past, stories of alien contact were usually written as
thrillers, with the sole and simple intention of scaring readers. H.G. Wells'
The War of the Worlds is probably the best example of that type of story. But
that's changed. Many contemporary writers have provided more thoughtful
treatments of aliens, deepening the realism and the significance of narratives
of alien contact.
Of course, before you can have a story of alien contact, you have to have some
aliens. One of the most provocative descriptions of aliens in all of science
fiction is found in Larry Niven's and Jerry Pournelle's The Mote in God's Eye. The
success of that book is largely due to the unique and ingenious aliens, the
Moties, that Niven created for the story. It's interesting, though, that Niven
says he doesn't really create aliens for a story, but suggests that it's the
other way around. I always design aliens for themselves. I almost never design
an alien to match a story. The story, some story will eventually include the
alien. The alien stands for himself. There are two particularly fascinating
things that Niven incorporated into these Moties. One is the fact that they are
not symmetrical. They have a head, torso, legs, and arms, as humans do. But the
arms are disproportionate. One is small and thin, the other is large and
powerful. Right. Niven says he took that idea from studying the structures of
living creatures on Earth. In that case, I had the idea that I was following a
progression with a protozoan, with an amoeba. You get radial symmetry inside and
out. Move up a goodly distance and you find starfishes with radial symmetry on
the outside and bilateral symmetry on the inside. Move up a little further, you
find flatworms and worms of all stance. At the level of bilateral symmetry
inside and out. Go as far as a human, you find bilateral symmetry on the outside
and no symmetry, well, half symmetrical on the inside. The lungs look
symmetrical, the kidneys look symmetrical, the intestines look like somebody
dropped a plate of spaghetti. I tried to move on to the next step, bilaterally
unsymmetrical on the outside. And I got the original Motie, which was the
engineer for them.
The other ingenious idea Niven developed for the Moties is the way they construct
and use machines. They're highly skilled tool users, but they have no standard
pre-manufactured machines, parts, or tools. They simply alter or reshape
whatever they find around them at the time to suit their needs. Niven says that
particular idea just came to him. It seemed interesting and even logical. I was
just playing with ideas at that point, and that one seemed like a fun one. It
also seemed likely enough, if you've got a critter with not much intelligence
except in the direction of tool making and tool altering, then why not? But the
thing has to keep testing its ability or it will lose it. It might as well be
designing something every time it needs a specific machine. Besides the
ingenuity Niven demonstrated in creating the Moties, he and Pournelle also weaved
some unexpected twists into the first contact theme. A reader interested in
aliens, or more specifically in first contact, can't afford to overlook the Mote
in God's eye.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And to Bill Vernon. The so-called new wave in science
fiction, which began in the mid-60s, was simply a new way of writing traditional
science fiction. There were changes, for instance, in... ...the modernization
was given more emphasis. ...sex and religion, that science fiction hadn't
really... ...the new wave changed the stereotyped science fiction formulas
that... ...since the pulp days of the 20s, 30s, and 40s. Frederik Pohl, who's
been an author, an editor, and an agent in the field of science fiction, has
something to say about that change. The new wave was an attempt, I guess, 15
years ago or more, of a number of writers to break away from the traditional
kinds of fiction. In fact, most of them didn't want to call it science fiction
anymore. They wanted to call it speculative fiction, or... And they were
interested, merely, in writing about the inner space, rather than... ...the
second, really, a lot of them... ...in things like... ...and rock music and so
on. But... ...in the... ...rather bitter internal... ...stool that went on in
science fiction, a lot of people take the science one way or the other. I
think... ...people... ... ...
But we need to remember here that the New Wave wasn't really a planned and deliberate movement
by a unified group of writers. One of the principal proponents of the New Wave,
author Norman Spinrad, believes it was just a bunch of diverse writers doing their own thing.
It was an old way, but there was never as a coherent philosophy in school of science fiction,
but there was never a New Wave in the same sense. There were a lot of ways. There are a lot of
different people doing a lot of different things. The people that were identified as the New Wave
were very diverse. What I was actually writing is very different to what Tom Dish was writing,
or Ballard, or Zelazny, or Delaney were also identified as New Wave writers. This stuff is
much more than, you know, Zelazny and Delaney and myself and Ballard and Aldiss and Mike,
but there were more differences between our work and the old stuff. There was more difference
within the so-called New Wave than there was within the so-called old Wave.
But Spinrad also thinks the New Wave was tightly connected to what was happening in society.
Of course, this mirrored the cultural climate at the time. It mirrored what was happening politically,
it mirrored what was happening in music, it mirrored what was happening in movies,
it was a phenomenon that went through the western civilizations at home.
There are those who say the New Wave is dead. Five-time Hugo winner Larry Niven says so,
for instance, and offers a reason for his passing. The New Wave is a very persuasive thing,
and very easy to use to justify bad stories. I think that's what killed it. Not the
increased characterization and experiments with typography and story format are a bad thing
in themselves, but it's so easy to use New Wave to justify a bad story. It was bound to go out.
The influence of the New Wave is still around, though. It's left its mark on the field.
Science fiction has been broadened, maybe enhanced somehow because of it.
Frederik Pohl states it well.
And the New Wave, if nothing else, taught a bunch of old dinosaurs like Asimov and
Heinlein and me, that there were non-traditional ways of constructing a novel.
See, most of us had grown up when science fiction was in the pulp magazine,
and most of it was written according to some variant of a pulp formula.
Well, it's necessary. I think the New Wave is responsible for teaching us that.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. The award-winning novel Ringworld is probably
Larry Niven's finest work. The Ringworld is an immense ring, large enough to hold 3 million
Earths, and with a thousand-mile high wall to hold in its atmosphere. It also has continents and oceans.
The Ringworld contains trillions of inhabitants of different species,
and derives energy from the sun at its center. Niven recalls where he obtained the idea for such
a fantastic structure. I ran across the concept Dyson's sphere. Dyson, the mathematician, came up
with the concept Dyson's shell, and he was misunderstood to some extent. So,
presently, I ran across an article about Dyson's sphere. A picture that is a golf ball, 93 million
miles in radius, with a sun at the center, and gravity generators all around the outside, so
he would live on the inside, terraform it with oceans and soil and air.
I ran across that and I didn't like it. I thought it could be improved, and I wound up with the Ringworld.
Reader studied the science behind the Ringworld and wrote Niven about seeming inconsistencies in
the design of the immense artifact. Column errors and elaborations because some of them don't really
fit the errors. It's just something that hadn't gotten into the original book.
One of the errors was spotted by some MIT students. It had to do with the instability of the Ringworld.
I suspected the Ringworld was unstable, and I suspected you'd eat attitude jets. I was sure that
the Ringworld was spinning fast enough to permit Bussard ramjets to be used as attitude jets,
which means you don't have a fuel problem at all. You're burning the solar wind.
But rapidly, some MIT people demonstrated that the Ringworld was unstable, and they were canning it
in the halls at the next World Cup. The Ringworld is unstable. The Ringworld is unstable.
It still took about seven years for anyone to figure out the exact numbers for the instability,
and they are horrifying. The Ringworld, a major solar flare, would have the Ringworld
grinding against its sun in five years. Well, I worked it in the plot. That was one
elaboration or error. Even teenage readers analyzed his Ringworld with a critical scientific eye.
A high school class in Florida got to work on the Ringworld, and their conclusion was that the
Ringworld's worst problem is that all the top soil would wind up in the oceans in about 3,000 years.
There are no earthquakes on the Ringworld. No mountain building forces.
But in a sequel, Ringworld Engineers, Niven attempted to correct such deficiencies.
He devised a way to answer the criticism of the Florida high schoolers.
Okay, that's a tough one. I set up a spill pipe system that runs the bottom from the
sea bottoms under the Ringworld and up over the edge of the Ringwall. That even allows you some
some mind accumulation of useful metals.
Fan response of that sort caused Ringworld engineers to be written,
and although Niven once said he wouldn't write anymore in the Known Space series,
the body of stories to which Ringworld belongs, he's not so sure anymore.
I've given up saying that the Known Space series is dead. There's just no point in it.
I've written five books worth of Known Space stories since I said that.
More on Larry Niven tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson.
He's one of the best-selling authors in the field of science fiction.
A fairly large portion of his work falls into the Known Space series,
a group of stories and novels with a consistent chronology.
Such a series is called a Future History. Niven believes there are some peculiar
attractions a Future History has for a science fiction author.
There had been Future Histories around, Poul Anderson and Robert Heinlein.
And I tell you, I guess we each evolved the idea somewhat independently.
And the idea is that if you carved out a consistent workable future,
it seems a shame to waste it on one story.
You put it in the background because you want the background of a story to seem
bigger than it is. So there are things that are simply unexplained.
And if you think of more to say on a given subject, why you go with it?
And if you think of a story that fits into the background of a previous story,
it allows you to elaborate on that background.
You sometimes you fall in love with the background.
And presently you've got a bunch of stories that link.
Niven has also written some bestselling books that fall outside his known space series.
Three of these, The Mote in God's Eye, Lucifer's Hammer,
and Oath of Fielty were written in collaboration with Jerry Pournelle.
We asked Niven how he and Pournelle collaborate.
Hard sometimes, but it always resolves. The question is who is most qualified to write a
that we have both decided needs writing. Before we start, we have the novel all laid out.
We know what's going in virtually everywhere. And if we don't, it feels like we do.
And if we find out we don't, we elaborate as we get to that section.
Okay, the next question is who is qualified to write a given scene? Sometimes it's obvious.
If we're dealing with a mad man, he's mine.
If we're dealing with military operations, it's Jerry's.
Aliens are generally mine. Politics is generally Jerry's. Knowledge of history, generally Jerry's.
And a real evil son of a bitch, Jerry usually creates him. And I usually run with him afterwards.
Niven occasionally writes science fiction humor, or rarity. He talks about his most successful
piece of humor. I suppose I could name old man of steel woman of queen eggs, which has gotten me
the most laughs. I suppose everybody seems to have read it. Those who haven't have heard about it
in a cocktail party. Niven's ready eye for humor can also be appreciated as he reveals that he's
detected one of his own alien creations from Ringworld, a Pearson's Puppeteer here on Earth.
I have reason to suspect a pair of puppeteers on Earth.
Look at the characteristics. Forget the shape. They must be masters of biology that hide that
peculiar three-legged two-headed shape. But consider their characteristics. They are cowards.
That is, they want everything utterly safe. No corners on anything. Everything is soft,
surfaces around the Puppeteer world. They don't even keep their world near a sun,
regarding it as a runaway fusion reactor, which of course it is. So, desperate regard for safety,
they plus an urge to meddle in the lifestyles of other species. Driving urge to meddle with
practically no restraints attached. What does that remind you of? It seems nearly
certain to me that Ralph Nader is a Pearson's puppeteer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.